=head1 DEPRECATION NOTICE

These days, NQP-rx is unmaintained; active development happens in
nqp at L<https://github.com/perl6/nqp/>. This repository only serves
as a historical document, and/or an implicit lesson in compiler design.

=head1 NQP-rx - Not Quite Perl (6)

NQP-rx is Copyright (C) 2009 by The Perl Foundation.  See F<LICENSE>
for licensing details.

This is "Not Quite Perl" -- a compiler for quickly generating PIR
routines from Perl6-like code.  The key feature of NQP-rx is that it's
designed to be a very small compiler (as compared with, say, perl6
or Rakudo) and is focused on being a high-level way to create
transformers for Parrot (especially hll compilers).  In addition,
unlike Rakudo, NQP-rx attempts to restrict itself to generating code
that can run in Parrot without the existence of any NQP-specific
runtime libraries.

=head2 Building from source

NQP-rx comes bundled with Parrot, so if you have a recent Parrot
distribution you likely also have a copy of NQP-rx.  Inside of a
Parrot installation NQP-rx is known as C<parrot-nqp>.

To build NQP-rx from source, you'll just need a C<make> utility
and Perl 5.8 or newer.  To automatically obtain and build Parrot
you may also need a subversion (svn) client.

To obtain NQP-rx directly from its repository:

    $ git clone git://github.com/perl6/nqp-rx.git

If you don't have git installed, you can get a tarball or zip
of NQP from github by visiting http://github.com/perl6/nqp-rx/tree/master
and clicking "Download".  Then unpack the tarball or zip.

Once you have a copy of NQP-rx, build it as follows:

    $ cd nqp-rx
    $ perl Configure.pl --gen-parrot
    $ make

This will create a "nqp" or "nqp.exe" executable in the
current (nqp-rx) directory.  Programs can then be run from
the build directory using a command like:

    $ ./nqp hello.pl

The C<--gen-parrot> option above tells Configure.pl to automatically
download and build the most appropriate version of Parrot into a
local "parrot/" subdirectory, install that Parrot into the
"parrot_install/" subdirectory, and use that for building NQP-rx.
It's okay to use the C<--gen-parrot> option on later invocations
of Configure.pl; the configure system will re-build Parrot only
if a newer version is needed for whatever version of Rakudo you're
working with.

You can use C<--parrot-config=/path/to/parrot_config> instead
of C<--gen-parrot> to use an already installed Parrot for building
NQP.  This installed Parrot must include its development
environment; typically this is done via Parrot's C<make install>
target or by installing prebuilt C<parrot-devel> and/or C<libparrot-dev>
packages.  The version of the already installed Parrot must satisfy a
minimum specified by the NQP-rx being built -- Configure.pl will
verify this for you.  Released versions of NQP-rx always build
against the latest release of Parrot; checkouts of the HEAD revision
from github often require a version of Parrot that is newer than
the most recent Parrot monthly release.

Once built, NQP-rx's C<make install> target will install NQP-rx
and its libraries into the Parrot installation that was used to
create it.  Until this step is performed, the "nqp" executable
created by C<make> above can only be reliably run from the root of
NQP-rx's build directory.  After C<make install> is performed
the executable can be run from any directory (as long as the
Parrot installation that was used to create it remains intact).

If the NQP-rx compiler is invoked without an explicit script to
run, it enters a small interactive mode that allows statements
to be executed from the command line.  

=head2 Differences from previous version of NQP

* Sub declarations are now lexical ("my") by default, use
  "our sub xyz() { ... }" if you want package-scoped subroutines.

* The  PIR q<...>;  construct is gone.  Use Q:PIR or pir::opcode(...)
  instead.

* The mainline code of modules is no longer tagged as ":load :init"
  by default.  Use  INIT { ... }  for any code that you want to be
  run automatically at startup.

* Cuddled else's are no longer valid Perl 6, 'else' requires a
  space after it.

* Double-quoted strings now interpolate $-variables.


